# parcel-portfolio-2023

Exploring Parcel the web application bundler just like webpack & vite. <br>
Parcel is a zero configuration web application bundler .

Bundlers are packages, if we want to use them we need a package manager either it could be yarn or npm. I'm going with npm.

## adding parcel to the project

`npm install --save-dev parcel`

Parcel has a development server built in, which will automatically rebuild our app as we make changes. Servers runs on http://localhost:1234 port.

To start it, run the parcel CLI pointing to your entry file:<br/>
`npx parcel src/index.html`

## parcel build process \*\*

`npx parcel src/index.html`

When you type `npx parcel src/index.html` into our terminal, we are instructing the npx tool to execute the parcel command with the specified input file as the entry point. Parcel can take any file as an entry point.

Parcel is a web application bundler, and this command initiates its bundling process.

1. `Locate parcel Package`: is parcel package is available or not.
2. `Execute parcel with Entry Point`: Entrypoint serves as the starting point for our web application.
3. `Parcel Bundling Process`:
    - `Parsing & Dependency Resolution`: Parcel reads the specified HTML file & analyzes its dependencies, including JavaScript, CSS, images, and other assets referenced within the HTML and its linked files.
    - `Bundling & Transformation`: Parcel bundles and transforms these dependencies into a format that is optimized for the web. It applies various optimizations such as **minification**, **tree shaking**, & **code splitting**.
    - `Output Generation`: Once the bundling & transformation process is complete, Parcel generates an output directory containing the bundled and optimized assets. This directory typically includes an index.html file and associated JavaScript and CSS files.
    - `dist Directory`: The output directory is typically named dist, and it's where Parcel places the final, optimized, and bundled files for your web application.
    - `.cache Directory`: The .cache directory (with a leading dot) is used by Parcel to store intermediate build artifacts and cached data to speed up the build process. This directory is also created in your project's root directory.
    - `Development Server` : http://localhost:1234
    - `Build Summary`: Parcel will provide a build summary in your terminal

## `Hot Module Replacement (HMR)`

HMR is a feature provided by Parcel. HMR allows us to update your application's code in real-time while the application is running, without requiring a full page reload.

Enabling HMR <br>

1. Start Development Server: `npx parcel serve appEntryPoint`
2. Automatic HMR: Parcel automatically detects changes in our code(HTML,JS,CSS) & updates the application in the browser on the fly.
    - E.g, We're working on a React component and you save your changes, Parcel will update only the changed component in the browser without reloading the entire page.

Working of HMR <br>
A file watcher algorithm written in c++. It keeps track of all the files which are changing realtime & it tells the server to reload.

## Package scripts

So far, we’ve been running the parcel CLI directly `npx parcel serve appEntryPoint`, but it can be useful to create some scripts in your _package.json_ file to make this easier. <br>

**package.json**

```json
{
	"name": "my-project",
	"source": "src/index.html",
	"scripts": {
		"start": "parcel",
		"build": "parcel build"
	},
	"devDependencies": {
		"parcel": "^2.9.3"
	}
}
```

**package.json's _Breakdown_**

1. `Entrypoint`: "source": "src/index.html"

2. `npm run start` -> parcel entry point (development stage)

    - "start": "parcel" is used for local development, serving your application with HMR.

3. `npm run build` -> parcel build entry point (production stage)
    - "build": "parcel build" is used to generate a production build that you can deploy to a web server.
    - How we deploy - upload the contents of the dist directory generated by Parcel's build process.

## Multiple Entry points

single-page applications (SPAs) will have single entry points.
multi-Page Application (MPA) will have Multiple Entry Points.

## Transpilation

Modern javascript code compatible with older versions of browsers.

The "browserslist" field in the package.json is used to specify the range of browser versions that your project should support. According to this parcel takes the help of babel in producing transpiled versions.

```json
    "browserslist": ["last 2 versions"]
```

last 2 versions of all browsers should support to load my project.

## npx parcel src/index.html --https

Sometime we need to test our application on https because something only works on HTTPS. <br>
Parcel gives us a functionality that we can just build our app on https on dev machine by the command.

## Transitive Dependencies

We have our packages manager which handles & takes care of our transitive dependencies of out code. <br>
If we have to build a production application ready app, which uses the all optimizations like minify, cleaning, building, compression, consistent hashing, etc then we need to perform all these. <br>
But we can't do this all alone, we need some dependencies on it. Those dependencies are might dependents of other dependencies. This tree is transitive dependencies.

## Tree shaking

In production builds, Parcel statically analyzes and removes everything that isn't used. This is called "tree shaking" or "dead code elimination".<br>
E.g. Suppose our application is importing a library which has a lot of functions. Then all of the functions will come into our code. But we don't want them all , we may use one or two of them. Here parcel will ignore all the unused functions.

# Parcel Features in glance:

1. HMR (Hot Module Reloading)
2. File watcher algorithms (C++)
3. Bundling
4. Minify code
5. Cleaning our code
6. Dev & production build
7. Super fast build algorithm
8. Image optimization
9. Caching while development
10. Compression
11. Compatibility with older browsers
12. Https on dev
13. Port number
14. Consistence hashing algorithm
15. Zero configuration
16. Tree shacking

# `Keep On exploring`

[Parcel Documentation](https://parceljs.org/docs/)
